
= Learning Programming: the Backlog
:published_at: 2014-09-29
:hp-tags: programming, learning


Thus far, I have been back to programming for a vanishingly small amount
of time, roughly three months by Github commit reckoning (plus a bit of
time spent in Codecademy). In that time it has seemed, to myself and
even to others to a lesser extent, rather remarkable the amount of
progress I've made. In just that three months and change I've written a
roguelike game, an old-fashioned line editor, a text graphics wrapper,
an esolang, a virtual machine, a basic weblog, and even taken over as
chief maintainer of an open source project for the first time.

Thus by all appearances, it seems like I've already learned a lot, and
in some ways that's true.

In other ways, it's not.

What I have learned thus far, more than anything, is that in actuality
for someone with a particular frame of mind and some grasp of logical
thinking and problem solving, it is relatively easy to make a seemingly
large amount of apparenty progress as a programmer in a very short span
of time.

I've realized that it is very easy to get fairly far in programming with
just a little bit of knowlege and some basic logic skills, but then when
you start wanting to push just a bit farther than that, the whole sense
of progress collapses like a house of cards ...

And the thing is, this can be a very dangerous trap, for learning
anything. A crucial time, one I'm frankly wrestling with. When learning
(or re-learning) a new skill, there's a point at which the "good start"
you've made is actually a hindrance. You _can_ become a programmer in 28
days.

You might even be decent at it, given some more practice, if you've the
head for it and all you want to do is be a
http://www.paulgraham.com/avg.html["Blub"] coder for life. In the old
days this was how a lot of working programmers got started, and cubicle
farms the world over are similarly filled with these. The local Java
apprenticeship program I think lasts all of three months. Many so-called
"hacker schools" and "bootcamps" more or less crash-course young minds
through an easy language like Ruby or Python in a matter of weeks and
send them off into the world $10,000 poorer and with all the coding
knowledge of the average Codecademy user.

To be a _good_ one, though, even a _great_ one, you need to be willing
to set aside that "good start" and keep building back on the
fundamentals again and again. And when you already have that start, when
you already feel like you _are_ "good enough," it's incredibly hard to
force yourself to go back to feeling like you've no idea what you're
doing all over again.

I programmed when I was younger, quite a lot in fact, and that skill
never quite decays, so that plus some great re-introductory material
seemed to be catapulting me into the stratosphere at a rate not
dissimilar from my foray into book publishing. There was a window when I
think I was even getting a bit cocky about it. Racket was good for
breaking this. The basics of Racket are as easy to grasp as any other,
probably the easiest Lisp to learn, with some pretty good intro books
and guides. But those advanced topics, the language tools, the
contracts, the dialects, all hang there in the Guide sidebar reminding
you of just how much more there is to learn. And hanging out with the
PLT crew, and the #esolang hackers, and other similarly smart folk
(seriously the smartest people I've ever met in programming were either
esolang nerds or Lispers or one flavor or another), is also hugely
eye-opening for a cocky young sprat.

This is all one reason why I've picked up quite a bit of backlog of
books to study, probably enough to fill a year's university curriculum
at a minimum. Now that the rambling phase of the post is over, I thought
it might be useful to someone or simply for posterity to catalog my
current "learn stack". These are the books I want to tackle in the
near-ish future, though in what order and which next is still the
subject of some debate.

http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/matthias/HtDP2e/[How To Design Programs] -
I've started this book twice. Both times I've got impatient or
distracted and gone on to something that seemed to be leading me towards
more direct progress; it has a very particular style of design it
teaches that I found a bit odd, and the focus on "learning languages"
was a bit frustrating when all I really wanted to do was learn more
about Racket proper.

https://mitpress.mit.edu/sicp/full-text/book/book-Z-H-1.html[Structure
and Interpretation of Computer Programs] - Anyone who is reading this
probably already is at least familiar with this name. It seems to be
perhaps one of the most well-regarded books on programming and CS there
is; almost no one I've ever spoken to about it had anything but glowing
praise, even the ones who didn't even write Scheme or Lisp anymore. I'm
definitely curious, especially as it covers a lot of systems programming
stuff that seems to be where my mind wants to go as a programmer. (For
similar reasons, I'm also really interested in
http://cs.brown.edu/courses/cs173/2012/book/[PLAI])

http://www.buildyourownlisp.com/[Build Your Own Lisp] - An unusual
approach for a new language introduction, this book aims to teach the
reader C by walking them through the development of a dialect of Lisp.
I'm a bit suspicious of some of the design decisions (it controversially
avoids dealing with quote and macros by replacing them with something
called "Q-expressions"), but C is a good language to know and this seems
like a fun way to learn it. In a similar vein, there is
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Write_Yourself_a_Scheme_in_48_Hours[Write
Yourself A Scheme in 48 Hours], which aims to give a crash course in
Haskell by teaching you how to build a basic Scheme interpreter with it.
This leads to my next pick:

http://learnyouahaskell.com/[Learn You a Haskel for Great Good] - I am
deeply curious about Haskell, because I am deeply curious about
functional programming and also by the unusual arcaneness of it. This
book seems to be a fan favorite, as it were, and the tone is certainly
inviting. There's also an http://learnyousomeerlang.com/[Erlang book]
inspired by it, which I'm more interested for professional reasons: it
was invented next-door, as it were, so there's a fair number of jobs
about in Erlang still.

I think the next book I tackle will be one of these, I just haven't
decided which yet. I'm very open to advice, so feel free to leave your
thoughts in the comments, as opinionated as you like.
