
= Apologizing for exuberance
:published_at: 2014-09-19
:hp-tags: abuse, games


So after some further consideration, I think I am not really the person
to reinvent the internet filter. I have a lot of learning to do before I
could possibly tackle something like that in anything like a useful
manner. It's possible I could hack together a pretty simple
word-frequency model, but I'm not at all certain I could really go
beyond that; I'm not an AI programmer, nor do I have any experience with
natural language processing. My experience so far has mostly been with
basic systems programming and game design. It's probable I'll return to
the problem in the distant future, but for right now I think it's best I
leave such a task to more capable hands.

I just get frustrated. I feel like I actually want to _do_ something
about the shit that's going on, besides just spreading the word about it
and condemning it. That is, to me, literally the least I can do. Hell,
if I _didn't_ do that, I'd think rather ill of myself, frankly.

I am merely a writer, ultimately, be it in code, in prose, or in games.
And as I said before, when all the tools you have are words, but the
jackals have not ears to hear or eyes to read those words, it can feel
like a bit of a useless talent. Instead perhaps the best I can do is, if
not contributing to the fight for equality necessarily, at least to the
fight for a better class of game that speaks to broader themes and more
inclusive worlds than more manshoots and bald-man-saves-the-world games.
Recent events have really done havoc to my motivation and enthusiasm for
gaming; but maybe if I can write something I _am_ enthusiastic about, it
might come back. If good writing and creativity are "killing games",
then maybe I should take up the hatchet as well...

I'm curious what others think, especially those women who're facing this
mess. What can I do? Or even, _should_ I be doing anything other than
what I have been; after all, it's your voice far more than mine that
needs to be heard right now.