
= Haskell is Cool
:published_at: 2014-10-03
:hp-tags: Haskell, Racket
:source-highlighter: highlightjs

After my last post and some thinking, I ultimately settled on _Learn You
a Haskell_ as my next book to work through, and after some initial
hassles trying to get a decent working environment set up, I must say
that I'm quite enjoying the language itself. It was running across
http://tryhaskell.org/[Try Haskell] that actually spurred me to finally
take the leap in that direction (seriously, online REPLs are the best
language demos period), and I was quickly impressed by the power hiding
in that seemingly obtuse syntax.

And of course, like everyone else ever (so many that _Learn You a
Haskell_ actually makes a bit of a joke out of it), I was impressed as
hell with the Haskell quicksort solution.

But after some tinkering in Racket, not for precisely the same reasons
as the book uses it.

For reference, the Haskell recursive quicksort looks like this:

[code,haskell]
-------------------------------------------------------
quicksort :: (Ord a) => [a] -> [a]
quicksort [] = []
quicksort (x:xs) =
    let smallerSorted = quicksort [a | a <- xs, a <= x]
        biggerSorted = quicksort [a | a <- xs, a > x]
    in smallerSorted ++ [x] ++ biggerSorted
-------------------------------------------------------

I know, right? It's short and sweet, and using multiple recursion and
list filtering to solve it takes a hell of a lot of the work out of it.
Hell, this is actually the first version of quicksort I've ever
understood; though in my defense the last time I tried to write a
quicksort was some 15 years ago as a teenage BASIC hacker (I failed.
Repeatedly.)

The book of course uses it as an example of the power of recursion, and
it is indeed a good example of where clever use of that can do a lot in
very little space (though personally I think the lazy factorial method
is a cooler example), but the thing is that any language that implements
good recursion can do the same algorithm and just as fast.

For instance, Racket can do the exact same algorithm in just a few more
lines (most of them in this case for clarity and convenience,
semantically it's _almost_ identical [but not quite, and I'll get to
why]).

[code,scheme]
------------------------------------------------------------------
(define (qs lst)
  (if (empty? lst)
      lst
      (let* ((hd (car lst))
             (tl (cdr lst))
             (smaller (qs (for/list ((i tl) #:when (<= i hd)) i)))
             (larger (qs (for/list ((i tl) #:when (> i hd)) i))))
         (flatten (cons smaller (cons hd larger))))))
------------------------------------------------------------------

So clearly, it's not exactly the _recursion_ that makes the example so
cool. No, what makes the Haskell version cool is when you realize what
it can do that our Racket port can't: anything but numbers. The Haskell
quicksort can readily handle numbers, strings, or lists of chars, all
thanks to the power of this line right here:

`quicksort :: (Ord a) => [a] -> [a]`

_Especially_ the `(Ord a)` bit: that's the Ord typeclass, which imports
types that Haskell knows how to put in order, thus allowing a statically
typed language to still nonetheless use the same <= operator regardless
of what type is actually being fed it (the other part of that feat is
the `[a]` bit, the generics).

To be able to get a similarly powerful, if not as convenient function,
we have to upgrade our Racket version a bit:

[code,scheme]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
(define (qs-2 fun lst)
  (if (empty? lst)
      lst
      (let* ((hd (car lst))
             (tl (cdr lst))
             (smaller (qs (for/list ((i tl) #:when (fun i hd)) i)))
             (larger (qs (for/list ((i tl) #:when ((negate fun) i hd)) i))))
        (flatten (cons smaller (cons hd larger))))))
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now our Racket quicksort has become a higher-order function, and must be
passed the less-than function it will use to find _smaller_ as well as
negate to find __larger__. But it's still not exactly replicated the
feat that Haskell's version would, and doing so directly would mean a
whole range of type checks. It is almost certainly possible, but not in
so concise a manner.

And of course, some of this difference comes from Haskell's special
little rules, like lists being mono-typed elements (as opposed to
Racket's free-wheeling ones); this is more limiting but also means that
functions like quicksort can largely be written to assume a list will
behave with it. If we pass it a list from elsewhere in our program, it
will still work as long as its members are members of Ord.

The amusing footnote to this is that the easy solution for Racket is to
make it a higher-order function (and in fact, this is even what Racket's
built-in sort does), whereas in _Learn You a Haskell_ the author doesn't even get to
higher-order functions until the chapter after the quicksort example.
