
= So I made a programming language. Now what?
:published_at: 2014-11-18
:hp-tags: Heresy, Racket


About a week ago, I had a ridiculous idea. I was in the process of
learning some basic Racket macros, and also still following the progress
of a couple vintage Lisp dialects for the Tandy Color Computer. Even
played around a bit with XLISP in OS-9. And then someone asked me what a
Lambda was.

Somehow, in the fog of all that (plus a week with a hell of a lot of
stress, mostly irrational), came a mad idea. What if someone mashed up
BASIC with Lisp? Stranger still, a functionally-oriented BASIC Lisp.

Then I went and wrote one.

I called it https://github.com/jarcane/heresy[Heresy], because that
seemed like the right name for it.

With help from a few helpful Racketeers in IRC, I now have a functional
dialect of Lisp that borrows heavily from BASIC syntax; a kind of
"Nutrasweet" syntax married with immutable variables and some (I'd like
to think) vaguely clever use of seemingly imperative constructs executed
with functional code.

It is also now the most well-recieved project I've ever released,
netting 18 stars on Github, almost 3,000 vistors to the repo, and a
whole day near the top of Hacker News' front page.

Now, don't get me wrong or think I'm letting it get to my head (well, I
probably am a little). I fully expect that many of those clicks were
more at the very novelty and silliness of the idea. But as ideas go,
I've seen dumber ones succeed, and it's been a useful learning project
that fits nicely into my current schedule. The question is though, what
do I do with it? Where do I want to go? Is Heresy a way to ease BASIC
programmers Lisp? A playground for weird ideas about functional
programming?

Time to establish some ground rules.

1.  _Heresy is BASIC_ - Heresy is an heir to BASIC, and aims to be at
least somewhat easy for BASIC programmers to learn. Mostly this means we
prefer BASIC names over the Lisp name, and naming conventions like the $
for string functions.
2.  _Heresy is a Lisp_ - Heresy is still a Lisp, and loves simple syntax
and s-expressions. While it makes use of some sugaring like literal
keywords for certain common primitives, these are best used sparingly.
Heresy is the Diet Coke of Evil, just one calorie, not quite evil
enough.
3.  _Heresy is functional_ - Functional, but not Haskell. It is not
intended solely as a vehicle for absolute functional purity. I love
Haskell. You love Haskell. We don't need to write another Haskell. Think
more in terms of a lower-calorie, more intelligible Clojure.
4.  _Heresy is for learning_ - Heresy started as a learning project for
me, a chance to learn how Lisp and functional programming really work on
a practical level. I hope that, in time, it can be that for others as
well, especially those who grew up with BASIC like me and still
sometimes struggle to get their head on this brave new FP world we live
in now.
5.  _Heresy is an experiment_ - Heresy is an experimental language. It's
very DNA is as a mad idea that came to life, and it's development should
be ready and willing to embrace new mad ideas and run with them. This is
where _carry_ came from, and I hope to have more mad ideas in the
future.

Those are my thoughts for now though. I would like to point your
attention to #5 in particular, because one of it's side effects is that
any or all of these rules probably will change or be ignored as
necessary over time. It also leaves out some things I haven't decided
yet, like how much of Heresy should be self-hosted (probably as much as
can be borne), or a more specific syntax standard for function names
(because ? for preds still looks wrong and un-BASIC to me).

Heresy is the projection of a fevered imagination still buzzing away
with strange new ideas. Think of me less as a BDFL and more of a Mad
King gibbering in the dark, still sometimes speaking truth in between
the deranged quartos and evocations of elder things from beyond time and
space ...
