
= On LET: a brief comparative thesis
:published_at: 2014-11-11
:hp-tags: Racket, programming


I started programming, as many people my age did, as a kid, with a
computer running Microsoft BASIC. Disk Extended Color Basic on a Tandy
Color Computer 3, to be precise. I wrote quite a few programs, large and
small, as well as modding a few others that came on various Rainbow
disks I'd cobbled together mostly from either the Internet or an uncle
who was far more invested in the scene.

Thus, when I at last discovered the introduction to macros and language
definitions in __Realm of Racket__, it struck me that it might be
interesting to practice those tools by experimenting with defining a
BASIC-Lisp hybrid which I am tentatively tempted to entitle "Heresy".

I'm still in the research stages right now, though I'm putting code to
file today, and in researching how to map keywords from one to the other
I discovered a very important clash: LET.

Besides the obvious math operators and so forth, LET is one of the few
standard keywords that exists in both BASIC and Lisp languages, but both
could not possibly seem to describe more polar opposite functions.

LET in BASIC is the somewhat deprecated global variable declarator and
assigner. Ie.:

`LET X = 5`

LET in old-school BASIC is probably closer in function to the old Lisp
keyword SETQ, in that it is used both to explicitly declare a new
variable, but also to set that variable to a new value. It's also
distinct from DIM in that DIM was primarily used to declare arrays until
much later dialects like QBasic and Visual Basic, and also because it
must explicitly assign a value.

LET in Lisp and Scheme however exist to provide temporary names for
local values, usually within a function or a macro. They almost provide
for variables what lambdas do for functions, and even allow the
definition of new functions as well (either through explicit syntax for
this, or by taking advantage of lambdas).

And yet ... look back at that syntax for the BASIC version again. Both
of these terms are coming from the same place: algebra. I am willing to
bet that nearly everyone reading this write now has done at least one
problem, probably thousands, that started with some statement of 'let x
equal ....' Wiktionary even cites this in the definition of the word as
an example: "Let P be the point where AB and OX intersect."

There is of course a reason for this. Lisp is famously based on Church's
lambda calculus, and its mathematical pedegree is hardly a secret.
Dartmouth BASIC meanwhile was originally made mainly to help students do
calculations for their homework assignments, the terminology springing
directly from the pages of their algebra and trigonometry assignments.

And it's in this historical meeting point that we can ask ourselves a
question, and answer it.

Question: how did these two uses of LET evolve into such polar
opposites? Answer: They didn't. They both mean the same thing; it's
their approach to problem solving that's different.

Wait, what?

It's true. If you go back and look at the exercises and code samples and
tools offered in the original Dartmouth BASIC, you realize something
about what BASIC programs are meant to be, vs. how Lisp programs are
generally approached. Dartmouth BASIC was written for tiny problems,
word problems. The domain of a BASIC program was expected to be a single
problem, and so the syntax and semantics both were constructed with that
goal in mind.

Lisp on the other hand, while it has diverged over the years into many
approaches from the purely functional Clojure to the 'basically just
rewritten C' of some Emacs-Lisp code, still fundamentally it comes
instead from a logic that was about breaking down one big program into
many littler problems, each of which may potentially need to define it's
own local variables.

It's not that LET necessarily means something different etymologically
here, both creators were ultimately seeking to define the same tool, but
the difference in how they actually work on a practical level and how
they came to act as keywords in two very different ways, has more to do
with how they approach problems as discrete pieces.

In the past I've often defended BASIC, in part on the strength of the
revisions made in more purely proceduraly dialects like QBasic, and in
part because we BASIC 'hobbyists', shunned away as we were by the C
coders and the elite ASM hackers of the day and since, really often
could write code just as procedural and well thought out as any. It's
just that the dirty secret, what those sneering outsiders could see that
we couldn't, was just how much we were working _against_ the language to
do it. BASIC was asked, and somehow managed, to do things and solve
problems far in advance of the scope for which it was ever designed.

There is actually tail-call-optimization and code for writing recursive
macros in _FreeBASIC_ now (there are, amusingly enough, even a couple
simple Lisp interpreters, even an embedded scripting language in Lisp
for FB). Of course, this is in FB, a modern dialect of the QBasic branch
with at least something more resembling a modern approach, but it still
illustrates the fierce devotion that BASIC fans were almost _driven to_
by their reputation in the wider community.

These days of course, I look at even QBasic code and shudder to think,
but then I also feel the same way looking at Java. And while Heresy
kinda started as a joke esolang idea and may stay that way, it interests
me to wonder if a "Lisp-flavored BASIC" might be a genuinely useful
dialect for introducing those die-hard BASIC coders to the flexibility
of a language that is not still fighting attempts to use it for more
than solving simple algebraic equations.

Of course, I still haven't decided which definition of LET to stick to.
