
= A resume and a code example in one
:published_at: 2014-12-29
:hp-tags: Heresy, programming


Recently I asked on Twitter about whether it was possible to find work
in functional programming without a degree, seeing as I'm a functional
programmer and I don't have a degree, and was pleasantly surprised to be
contacted by a recruiter who provided some very useful advice on which
languages to look into.

They also asked for a resume, which suddenly brought me to the
realization that I hadn't actually yet written a programming-oriented
resume yet.

So I started thinking of how I could write a resume that would actually
highlight my skills thus far as a programmer in an immediately obvious
way, and I think I found an interesting solution.

It's pretty common for UI or graphics designers to hand design their own
resumes; it's a very clear and direct way of showing off your own design
skills in an obvious way. Sadly, other than that there's little in the
way of options for the rest of us: there's loads of templates out there
for making an interesting _looking_ resume, but that's not really the
same effect for programmers as it is for a designer.

What's needed is a way to show off what one is capable of as a
programmer through the medium of the resume itself.

I'm not sure I've quite got that far yet, but I have done what I think
is a close-by solution: showing off one's basic capabilities as a
programmer through the medium of how the resume is __generated__.

Thus, https://github.com/jarcane/resume.hsy[resume.hsy].

`resume.hsy` is a straightforward Heresy program with one goal: to
generate my resume in Markdown format. After just a half-day's effort,
it succeeds at it.

It's not particularly impressive code (and the contortions involved in
generating the output strings are a little ugly), and the output result
is by design, not especially beautiful. The point here isn't to make a
beautiful design object, but to present my skills in a clear format
through the lens of a clear example of how I code. The fact that I
designed the language it's written in is also part of the point of the
demonstration, inspired by
https://twitter.com/boothead/status/545886788196507648[the reaction of
one commenter] to my original post on Twitter.

Admittedly, that last bit is probably also a weakness: nobody codes in
Heresy yet except me. But the Markdown output is readily available, and
the code is mostly readable to anyone familiar with Lisp, and I'm also
very proud of having written the first example of useful code in Heresy.
