
= (define universe '(part 1))
:published_at: 2014-09-27
:hp-tags: DRAFT


_The following constitutes the first part of a piece of fiction. It was
heavily inspired by my recent time spent in the Lisp community, tales of
the bygone days of the AI Lab, as well as my ongoing re-introduction to
the works of Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett, and can perhaps best be
summarized as a sort of "counter-argument" to American Gods. More than
that I shall not say, to better establish some sense of mystery.
Subsequent parts will come as I am inspired to write them._

[code,racket]
------------------
(begin
  (define universe
    (void)))
------------------

In the book of Genesis, it is said that on the seventh day, God created
man in his own image. For centuries, much of mankind thus assumed this
statement was meant in the most literal way possible, painting miles of
canvas with perfectly ethnographically incorrect representations of the
almighty creator as an imposing but almost mundanely human figure.

Julia Ukkonen fidgeted nervously. She was always nervous about meeting
the Guru, and when she was nervous about meeting the Guru, she thought
about Genesis. She was never quite sure why, but somehow that passage
always came to mind, even though the Guru was himself not particularly
Godlike in appearance.

There was something about his voice, she decided. He always spoke as if
his voice was actually coming from somewhere else, and merely projected
into the space in which they happened to be standing.

She breathed an impatient sigh. The other thing she disliked of course
was the waiting. While he was not strictly in a leadership role, the
Guru had been given the office of one so appointed, complete with a
secretary and a waiting room. Julia suspected this was merely to provide
a barrier against distraction on his part, rather than any airs towards
authority: if anything the Guru had customarily seemed quite resistant
to any kind of authority position.

Julia thought she had never seen someone so clearly brilliant do so much
to avoid any actual recognition of that brilliance. His code was some of
the most elegant and creatively executed she had ever seen, and yet for
some reason the American former AI expert was working as a senior
programmer for a tiny inventory services company in Central Finland.

None of her co-workers realized any of this though, and that's why she
was the one in charge of maintaining his code. The nickname "Guru" had
not been given honorifically; most of the other programmers in the
office made jokes at his expense, despite of (or perhaps because of) the
fact that not a one of them understood the Guru's code.

Julia could though, and being the sole woman and the junior member of a
team of 20-something programmers meant that the task of reviewing and
maintaining the Guru's code had been kicked down the ladder until it had
finally landed in her lap. Initially Julia had expected this to be
another bit of drudge work the other self-ascribed "hackers" felt they
were too good for, but she quickly grew to relish each new chance to
work her way through the Guru's submissions, and it gave her a certain
boost to know that she was the only one there who did.

Sometimes though, she would come across a function or a line of code or
some other bit of logic that would completely escape her, and that meant
it was time to "knock at the cave," as she liked to call it. She wasn't
really sure why she liked to call it that either, but it made her
chuckle every time she thought it. In actuality it meant she'd have to
email his secretary to an arrange an appointment, and then wait about
fidgeting for his appearance at the door of his office.

Some days this could take quite a while. Today was one of those days.