
= First week on the job
:published_at: 2015-06-05
:hp-tags: Clojure


It has begun.

In accordance with my education in the Finnish language, a portion of
time, about two months, has been set aside over the summer for the
students to take a "work trial" at a Finnish workplace. Owing to my
powerful disinterest in winding up spending my summer stocking shelves
at a supermarket, I naturally was quite on top of attempting to find
some more suitable environment for a budding programmer, which I'm
delighted to say I did.

The work place in question is a firm called http://metosin.fi[Metosin],
a Clojure consulting firm stationed right in the heart of the city, and
this week was my very first week on the job. It had, as it was, been a
little while since I dove into Clojure (which anyone who's actually read
any of this blog, ie. no one, is likely to remember), so prior to
starting the job I dove into a couple web apps in anticipation of my
arrival and future employment.

For starters, I did Ludum Dare this year, banging out a spiffy little
Pok√©mon themed idler game in Hoplon, which you can find
https://github.com/jarcane/trainers-progress[here]. Hoplon is an
interesting framework, whose concept I was initially quite excited by,
an excitement whose dwindling you can perhaps most likely best glean
from the fact that when for my try-out task for Metosin it was suggested
I use Reagent instead, I was actually more than a bit relieved.

This task took the form of a full-stack weather look-up application,
which I in my infinite nerditude decided to call
https://github.com/jarcane/wunderprojectj[wunderprojectj], a reference
so unutterably obscure than I'm pretty sure no one even noticed, and if
you did, perhaps I shall consider buying you a beer (and then backing
slowly away into the night).

Since my official start date, I've been at work on a simple CRUD sort of
a web app for managing members of a matrikkeli organization (a term
which I am obliged to indicate I'm not entirely sure there's a direct
translation for, but that doesn't really matter for the purposes of this
blog anyway).

It's been suggested I keep some kind of log of how the work is going and
what I've been learning, so after the jump, I'll get on with how my
week's been going.

The app is, by the description of my fellow co-workers, quite simple,
which is to say, by the standards of anything I'd had a personal hand in
previously, it is enormously complicated. Or at least, that's how I felt
for the first two days on the job, especially as initially my suggested
task was first porting the entire front-end from Om to Reagent. I spent
the bulk of the first few days just trying to get my head 'round the
organization of the code base, and reading reams and reams of
documentation on various libraries trying to come to grips with the
moving parts and how such a task might even be approached. I had a hell
of a time finding a whole lot of anything from anyone who's actually
made such a transition, and Om and Reagent do things in very different
ways; besides which I had trouble even finding many examples of an
application of this scope written in Reagent. I actually wound up
banging up an incredibly primitive toy Reagent app just to figure out
how to refer to a single state atom across multiple files. You can see
that https://github.com/jarcane/multipage-reagent[here] for what it's
worth.

In the process, I did manage to fix a couple of bugs with the user
profile image display and upload, one of which (with help) was
discovered to be the result of an API refactor that'd never been
translated to the actual front end calls, and the other of which was a
failure in the image validation which more or less turned the image
upload into an accidental file hosting service.

Eventually after some discussions mid-week with the rest of the crew,
the scope of my responsibility was narrowed down instead to new feature
implementation, which has gone a bit better, and given me a bit more
opportunity to really get used to the project organization and so forth.
I managed to implement a user status flag and interest tags on the
back-end, and search for the latter on the front-end. Sadly I've so far
not yet found a way to making those user tags user-editable yet, partly
I suspect because I'm having a bit of trouble following the libraries
used for the user profile form. My intent is to keep at it though, at
least to get some kind of rough working prototype.

At this point it's difficult to pin down exactly how much I've learned
from all this, but I've certainly been exposed to quite a lot of new
technology, and I'd like to think I'm getting a bit more comfortable
with the work at least so far. On the whole, not totally unproductive
for a first week.
